The human gut is home to hundreds of species of microbes. These are mostly
bacteria and this community of microbes in the microbiome. Although we all have
the same general types of bacteria, each of us has our own unique microbiome.
There are as many bacterial cells in our gut as we have human cells and that
play important roles in human health.

* Help to break down the food we eat
* Produce vitamins that we require
* Train and maintain our immune system
* They are the first line of defense against infection

MAGIC is IMAGINE's main cohort study. With the goal of recruiting 8,000
subjects, this project will study how three important variables (genes, diet and
mental health) impact the gut microbiome in persons with inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and in turn how together they
impact the disease course. 

A key part of MAGIC is to generate microbiome profiles for each individual.

### How do we study microbiome and generate these microbiome profiles?

Each type of bacteria (Species) has a unique genetic "barcode" in the bacteria's
DNA. To determine the mircobiome composition, we isolate the DNA from your stool
sample and isolate and sequence these bacterial DNA barcodes. No human DNA is
sequenced, just these bacterial barcodes. We generate 10,000 - 50,000 barcode
sequences per sample. These sequences are then analyzed to identify each species
and how many of each species is present.

Think of the bacteria in your gut like a jar of jelly beans. The barcode tells
us which colour each jelly bean is, and the number of times we sequence that
barcode tells us how many of this specific bacteria are present. This allows us
to sort the bacteria into species (colors) and generate the "taxonomic bar
charts" like yours on the first page of this document.

JELLY BEAN IMAGE

As there are hundreds of species in a sample, we quickly run out of colors! So
to make the charts we often group closely related species together at the Genus
level (contains multiple species) or Family level (contains multiple Genera
(plural of genus)).

These microbiome profiles are just the start of the analysis. This information
will be used to compare profiles between healthy controls and patients, how an
individual's microbiome changes with health status and identify associations of
specific microbes with disease. Understanding these associations between our
microbes and health/disease will lead to new treatments targeting the microbiome
-- reducing the 'bad' bacteria and increasing the 'good' bacteria.
